# Víðarr Glossary

- analysis output - the data generated by a workflow run. Víðarr understands two kinds of output: files and URLs.
- external identifier - a reference to external (LIMS) data. It has a _provider_, the name of the data store that is the source for an external identifier, and an _id_ which is the store-specific name for this data. The same ID can be re-used across multiple providers.
- external key - a reference to a specific version of external (LIMS) data. This has the same data as an _external identifier_ plus a dictionary of versions. Each version has a _version key_ and a _version value_.
- label (analysis output) - additional information attached by the workflow run. This can serve as metadata for consumers of Víðarr output. For instance, it could be used to differentiate between read 1 and read 2 FASTQs or indicate the number of records in a file.
- label (workflow) - additional parameters used to differentiate workflows during matching. For instance, the same input FASTQ might be aligned to two different genome references, so a label could be used to distinguish these cases.
- metadata - information provided during launch of a workflow run to determine how the *output* should be treated. Specifically, it determines which external identifiers/keys are associated with which outputs.
- parameters - the input information for a workflow run.
- provider - An external data store (usually a LIMS) that holds identifiers that can be associated with _workflow runs_ and _analysis output_.
- provisioner, input - a plugin that can use Víðarr paths or user-provided information to put a real file into a location usable by a workflow engine.
- provisioner, output - a plugin that can take a file created by a workflow run and put it into permanent storage and provide a path, size, and checksum.
- provisioner, runtime - a plugin that can take an identifier from a workflow engine and extract any information about the workflow itself (_e.g._, runtime performance, logs) and put them into permanent storage.
- target - configuration of provisioners and a workflow engine that is capable of executing workflow runs.
- workflow - a kind of analysis procedure. Each workflow can have many _versions_ that can be executed. A workflow defines _labels_ that must be included in order to execute any version. All versions of a workflow are considered equivalent for the purposes of matching (_i.e._, if a new version is available, but a successful workflow run from previous version completed, then it should not be executed again). See the _OOP analogy_ below.
- workflow engine - an external system that can launch and monitor jobs (_e.g._, Cromwell, Nextflow).
- workflow run - a particular execution of a workflow version. See the _OOP analogy_ below.
- workflow version - a script that can be executed by a workflow engine that instructs the workflow engine to run appropriate software based on the parameters in a workflow run. For instance, there might be a workflow for _BWAmem alignment_ with multiple versions that encompass both the version of BWAmem and a WDL script used to launch it. See the _OOP analogy_ below.

## OOP Analogy
The relationship between workflows, workflow versions, and workflow runs can be
a bit confusing. They can be analogised to object-oriented programming in the
following way:

- A workflow is analogous to an interface. It defines a set of objects that are interchangeable. The contents of that interface are the labels.
- A workflow version is a concrete class that implements an interface. Just like a class, it _may_ implement multiple interfaces (_e.g._, there might be an QC WDL script that can run on genome and transcriptome data, but it is registered under two different workflow names because there is a reason to keep QCs logically separate by type). Also like a class, the "constructor" for this object (_i.e._, the parameters and metadata information) is specific to the workflow version.
- A workflow run is a particular _instance_, in the object oriented sense, of a workflow version. It is a workflow version instance that has been constructed with a particular set of parameters.
